Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

Jack Parker-Holder * 1 2 Minqi Jiang * 1 3 Michael Dennis 4 Mikayel Samvelyan 1 3 Jakob Foerster 2
Edward Grefenstette 1 3 Tim Rocktäschel 1 3

Abstract

arXiv:2203.01302v3 [cs.LG] 30 Sep 2023

Training generally-capable agents with reinforcement learning (RL) remains a significant challenge. A promising avenue for improving the
robustness of RL agents is through the use of
curricula. One such class of methods frames environment design as a game between a student and
a teacher, using regret-based objectives to produce environment instantiations (or levels) at the
frontier of the student agent’s capabilities. These
methods benefit from theoretical robustness guarantees at equilibrium, yet they often struggle to
find effective levels in challenging design spaces
in practice. By contrast, evolutionary approaches
incrementally alter environment complexity, resulting in potentially open-ended learning, but
often rely on domain-specific heuristics and vast
amounts of computational resources. This work
proposes harnessing the power of evolution in
a principled, regret-based curriculum. Our approach, which we call Adversarially Compounding Complexity by Editing Levels (ACCEL), seeks
to constantly produce levels at the frontier of an
agent’s capabilities, resulting in curricula that start
simple but become increasingly complex. ACCEL maintains the theoretical benefits of prior
regret-based methods, while providing significant
empirical gains in a diverse set of environments.
An interactive version of this paper is available at
https://accelagent.github.io.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton and Barto (1998)) considers the problem of an agent learning through experience
to maximize reward in a given environment. The past decade
has seen a surge of interest in RL, with high profile successes
in games (Vinyals et al., 2019; Berner et al., 2019; Silver
*

Equal contribution 1 Meta AI 2 University of Oxford 3 UCL
UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Jack Parker-Holder
<jackph@robots.ox.ac.uk>, Minqi Jiang <msj@fb.com>.

4

Preprint.

et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2013; Hu and Foerster, 2020) and
robotics (OpenAI et al., 2019; Andrychowicz et al., 2020),
with some believing RL may be sufficient for producing
generally capable agents (Silver et al., 2021). Despite the
promise of RL, it is often a challenge to train agents capable
of systematic generalization (Kirk et al., 2021).
This work focuses on the use of adaptive curricula for training more generally-capable agents. By adapting the training
distribution over the parameters of an environment, adaptive
curricula have been shown to produce more robust policies
in fewer training steps (Portelas et al., 2019; Jiang et al.,
2021b). For example, these parameters may correspond to
friction coefficients in a robotics simulator or maze layouts
for a navigation task. Each concrete setting of parameters
results in an environment instance called a level. Indeed
in many prominent RL successes, adaptive curricula have
played a key role, acting over opponents (Vinyals et al.,
2019), game levels (Team et al., 2021), or parameters of a
simulator (OpenAI et al., 2019; Andrychowicz et al., 2020).
Unsupervised Environment Design (UED, Dennis et al.
(2020)) formalizes the problem of finding adaptive curricula,
whereby a teacher agent designs levels using feedback from
a student, which seeks to solve them. When using regret
as feedback, Dennis et al. (2020) showed that if the system
reaches equilibrium, then the student must follow a minimax
regret strategy, i.e. the student would be capable of solving
all solvable environments. This approach produces student
policies exhibiting impressive zero-shot transfer to challenging human designed environments (Dennis et al., 2020;
Jiang et al., 2021a; Gur et al., 2021). However, training such
an adversarial teacher remains a challenge, and so far, the
strongest empirical results come from curating randomly
sampled levels for high-regret, rather than learning to directly design such levels (Jiang et al., 2021a). This approach
is unable to take advantage of any previously discovered
level structures, and its performance can be expected to
degrade as the size of the design space grows.
An important benefit of adaptive curricula is the possibility
of open-ended learning (Soros and Stanley, 2014), given the
curriculum can be steered toward constantly designing novel
tasks for the agent to solve. While generating truly openended learning remains a grand challenge (Stanley et al.,

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

Figure 1. The evolution of a level in three different environments: MiniHack lava grids, MiniGrid mazes and BipedalWalker terrains. In
each case, the far left shows a base level, acting as a parent for subsequent edited levels to the right. Each level along the evolutionary
path has a high regret for the student agent at that point in time. Thus the level difficulty co-evolves with the agent’s capabilities. In each
environment, we see that despite starting with simple levels, the pursuit of high regret leads to increasingly complex challenges. This
complexity emerges entirely without relying on any environment-specific exploration heuristics. Note that since the agent can move
diagonally in the lava environment, the final level in the top row is solvable.

2017), recent works in the evolutionary community have
taken the first steps in this direction, through methods such
as Minimal Criteria Coevolution (MCC, Brant and Stanley
(2017)) and POET (Wang et al., 2019; 2020). These approaches show that evolving levels can effectively produce
agents capable of solving a diverse range of challenging
tasks. In contrast to prior UED works, these evolutionary
methods directly take advantage of the most useful structures found so far in a constant process of mutation and
selection. However, the key drawbacks of these methods
are their reliance on domain specific heuristics and need for
vast computational resources, making it challenging for the
community to make further progress in this direction.
In this work, we seek to harness the power and potential
open-endedness of evolution in a principled regret-based
curriculum. We introduce a new algorithm, called Adversarially Compounding Complexity by Editing Levels, or
ACCEL. ACCEL evolves a curriculum by making small
edits (e.g. mutations) to previously high-regret levels, thus
constantly producing new levels at the frontier of the student
agent’s capabilities (see Figure 2). Levels generated by ACCEL begin simple but quickly become more complex. This
dynamic benefits the beginning of training where the student can then learn more quickly (Berthouze and Lungarella,
2004; Schmidhuber, 2013), and encourages the policy to
rapidly co-evolve with the environment to solve increasingly
complex levels (see Figure 1).
We believe ACCEL provides the best of both worlds:
an evolutionary approach that can generate increasingly
complex environments, combined with a regret-based
curator that reduces the need for domain-specific heuristics
and provides theoretical robustness guarantees in equilibrium. ACCEL leads to strong empirical gains in both

sparse-reward navigation tasks and a 2D bipedal locomotion
task over challenging terrain. In both domains, ACCEL
demonstrates the ability to rapidly increase level complexity
while producing highly capable agents. ACCEL produces
and solves highly challenging levels with a fraction of the
compute of previous approaches, reaching comparable
level complexity as POET while training on less than
0.05% of the total number of environment interaction
samples, on a single GPU. An open source implementation of ACCEL reproducing our experiments is available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/dcd.

2. Background
2.1. From MDPs to Underspecified POMDPs
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is defined as a tuple
⟨S , A, T , R, γ⟩, where S and A are the set of states and
actions respectively, T : S × A → S is the transition
function from state st to state st+1 given action at , R : S →
R is the reward function, and γ is the discount factor. Given
an MDP, the goal of reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton
and Barto (1998)) is to learn a policy
P π that maximizes the
expected discounted return, i.e. E[ t γ t rt ].
Despite its generality, the MDP framework is often an unrealistic model for real-world environments. First, it assumes
full observability of the state, which is often impossible
in practice. This limitation is addressed by the partially
observable MDP (POMDP), which includes an observation
function I : S → O mapping the true state (unknown to
the agent) to a (potentially noisy) set of observations O.
Secondly, the traditional MDP framework assumes a single
reward and transition function, which are fixed throughout
training. Instead, in the real world, agents may experience

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

variations not seen during training, making robust transfer
crucial in practice.
To address the latter issue, we use the recently introduced
Underspecified POMDP, or UPOMDP (Dennis et al., 2020),
given by M = ⟨A, O, Θ, S, T , I, R, γ⟩. This definition is
identical to a POMDP with the addition of Θ to represent the
free parameters of the environment, similar to the context
in a Contextual MDP (Modi et al., 2017). These parameters can be distinct at every time step and incorporated into
the transition function T : S × A × Θ → S. Following
Jiang et al. (2021a) we define a level Mθ as an environment resulting from a fixed θP
∈ Θ. We define the value
T
of π in Mθ to be V θ (π) = E[ i=0 rt γ t ] where rt are the
rewards achieved by π in Mθ . UPOMDPs are generally
applicable, as Θ can represent possible transition dynamics
and changes in observations, e.g. in sim2real (Peng et al.,
2017; OpenAI et al., 2019; Andrychowicz et al., 2020), as
well as different reward functions or world topologies in
procedurally-generated environments.
2.2. Methods for Unsupervised Environment Design
Unsupervised Environment Design (UED, Dennis et al.
(2020)) seeks to produce a series of levels that form a curriculum for a student agent, such that the student agent is
capable of systematic generalization across all possible levels. UED typically views levels as produced by a generator
(or teacher) maximizing some utility function, Ut (π, θ). For
example DR corresponds to a teacher with a constant utility
function, for any constant C:
UtU (π, θ) = C.

(1)

Recent UED methods use a teacher that maximizes regret,
defined as the difference between the expected return of the
current policy and the optimal policy. The teacher’s utility
is then defined as:
UtR (π, θ) = argmax{R EGRETθ (π, π ∗ )}

(2)

= argmax{V θ (π ∗ ) − V θ (π)}.

(3)

π ∗ ∈Π
π ∗ ∈Π

π∈Π

θ,π ∈Θ,Π

k=t

where λ and γ are the Generalized Advantage Estimation
(GAE, Schulman et al. (2016)) and MDP discount factors respectively, and δt , the TD-error at timestep t. Equipped with
this method for approximating regret, Corollary 1 in Jiang
et al. (2021a) finds that if the student agent only trains on
curated levels, then it will follow a minimax regret strategy
at equilibrium. Thus, counterintuitively, the student learns
more effectively by training on less data.
Empirically PLR has been shown to produce policies with
strong generalization capabilities, but remains limited in
only curating randomly sampled levels. PLR’s inability to
directly extend previously discovered structures makes it
unlikely to sample more complex structures to encourage
further robustness and generalization. Random search suffers from the curse-of-dimensionality in higher-dimensional
design spaces, where randomly encountering levels at the
frontier of the agent’s current capabilities can be highly
unlikely, especially as the agent becomes more capable.

3. Adversarially Compounding Complexity

Regret-based objectives are desirable, as they have been
shown to promote the simplest possible levels that the student cannot currently solve (Dennis et al., 2020). More
formally, if St = Π is the strategy set of the student and
St = Θ is the strategy set of the teacher, then if the learning
process reaches a Nash equilibrium, the resulting student
policy π provably converges to a minimax regret policy,
defined as
π = argmin{ max
{R EGRETθ (π, π ∗ )}}.
∗

agent and a second agent. By maximizing this difference,
the teacher maximizes an approximation of the student’s
regret. Furthermore, multi-agent learning systems may not
always converge in practice (Mazumdar et al., 2020). Indeed, the Achilles’ heel of prior UED methods, like PAIRED
(Dennis et al., 2020), is the difficulty of training the teacher,
typically entailing an RL problem with sparse rewards and
long-horizon credit assignment. An alternative regret-based
UED approach is Prioritized Level Replay (PLR, Jiang et al.
(2021b;a)). PLR trains the student on challenging levels
found by curating a rolling buffer of the highest-regret levels
surfaced through random search over possible level configurations. In practice, PLR has been found to outperform
other UED methods that directly train a teacher. PLR approximates regret using a score function such as the positive
value loss:
!
T
T
X
1X
max
(γλ)k−t δk , 0
(5)
T t=0

(4)

However, without access to π ∗ for each level, UED algorithms must approximate the regret. PAIRED estimates regret as the difference in return attained by the main student

In this section we introduce a new algorithm for UED, combining an evolutionary environment generator with a principled regret-based curator. Unlike PLR which relies on
random sampling to produce new batches of training levels, we instead propose to make edits (e.g. mutations) to
previously curated ones. Evolutionary methods have been
effective in a variety of challenging optimization problems
(Stanley et al., 2019; Pugh et al., 2016), yet typically rely
on handcrafted, domain-specific rules. For example, POET
manually filters BipedalWalker levels to have a return in
the range [50, 300]. The key insight in this work is that
regret serves as a domain-agnostic fitness function for evolution, making it possible to consistently produce batches

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design
Generator
Curator

Editor
Update buffer
Replay level

Student

Select for editing

Figure 2. An overview of ACCEL. Levels are randomly sampled
from a generator and evaluated, with high-regret levels added to
the level replay buffer. The curator selects levels to replay, and the
student only trains on replay levels. After training, the regret of
replayed levels are edited and evaluated again for level replay.

of levels at the frontier of agent capabilities across domains.
Indeed, by iteratively editing and curating the resulting levels, the levels in the level replay buffer quickly increase
in complexity. As such, we call our method Adversarially
Compounding Complexity by Editing Levels, or ACCEL.
ACCEL does not rely on a specific editing mechanism,
which could be any mutation process used in other openended evolutionary approaches (Soros and Stanley, 2014).
In this paper, editing involves making a handful of changes
(e.g. adding or removing obstacles in a maze), which can
operate directly on environment elements within the level
or on a more indirect encoding such as the latent-space
representation of the level under a generative model of the
environment.
In general, editing may rely on more advanced mechanisms,
such as search-based methods, but in this work we predominantly make use of simple, random mutations. ACCEL
makes the key assumption that regret varies smoothly with
the environment parameters Θ, such that the regret of a level
is close to the regret of others within a small edit distance. If
this is the case, then small edits to a single high-regret level
should lead to the discovery of entire batches of high-regret
levels—which could be an otherwise challenging task in
high-dimensional design spaces.
Following PLR (Jiang et al., 2021a), we do not immediately
train on edited levels. Instead, we first evaluate them and
only add them to the level replay buffer if they have high
regret, estimated by positive value loss (Equation 5). The
full procedure is shown in Algorithm 1.
ACCEL can be seen as a UED algorithm taking a step toward open-ended evolution (Stanley et al., 2017), where
the evolutionary fitness is estimated regret, as levels only
stay in the population (that is, the level replay buffer) if
they meet the high-regret criterion for curation. However,
ACCEL avoids some important weaknesses of evolutionary
algorithms such as POET: First, ACCEL maintains a popula-

Algorithm 1 ACCEL
Input: Level buffer size K, initial fill ratio ρ, level generator
Initialize: Initialize policy π(ϕ), level buffer Λ
Sample K ∗ ρ initial levels to populate Λ
while not converged do
Sample replay decision d ∼ PD (d)
if d = 0 then
Sample level θ from level generator
Collect π’s trajectory τ on θ, with stop-gradient ϕ⊥
Compute regret score S for θ (Equation 5)
Update Λ with θ if score S meets threshold
else
Sample a replay level, θ ∼ Λ
Collect policy trajectory τ on θ
Update π with rewards R(τ )
Edit θ to produce θ′
Collect π’s trajectory τ on θ′ , with stop-gradient ϕ⊥
Compute regret score S (S ′ ) for θ (θ′ )
Update Λ with θ (θ′ ) if score S (S ′ ) meets threshold
(Optionally) Update Editor using score S
end
end
tion of levels, but not a population of agents. Thus, ACCEL
requires only a single desktop GPU for training. In contrast,
evolutionary approaches typically require a CPU cluster.
Moreoever, forgoing an agent population allows ACCEL
to avoid the agent selection problem. Instead, ACCEL directly trains a single generalist agent. Finally, since ACCEL
uses a minimax regret objective (rather than minimax as in
POET), it naturally promotes levels at the frontier of agent’s
capabilities, without relying on domain-specific knowledge
(such as reward ranges). Training on high regret levels also
means that ACCEL inherits the robustness guarantees in
equilbrium from PLR (Corollary 1 in Jiang et al. (2021a)):
Remark 1. If ACCEL reaches a Nash equilibrium, then the
student follows a minimax regret strategy.
In contrast, other evolutionary approaches primarily justify
their applicability solely via empirical results on specific domains. As our experiments show, a key strength of ACCEL
is its generality. It can produce highly capable agents in a
diverse range of environments, without domain knowledge.

4. Experiments
In our experiments we seek to compare agents trained with
ACCEL with several of the best-performing UED baselines.
In all cases, we train a student agent via Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO, Schulman et al. (2018)). To evaluate
the quality of the resulting curricula, we show all performance with respect to the number of gradient updates for
the student policy, as opposed to total number of environment interactions, which is, in any case, often comparable

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

for PLR and ACCEL (see Table 10). For a full list of hyperparameters for each experiment please see Table 11 in
Section C.3. Our primary baseline is Robust PLR (Jiang
et al., 2021a), which combines the random generator with
a regret-based curation mechanism. The other baselines
are domain randomization (DR), PAIRED (Dennis et al.,
2020), and a minimax adversarial teacher. The minimax
baseline corresponds to the objective used in POET without
the hand-coded constraints. We leave the comparison to
population-based methods to future work due to the computational expense required. We report results in a consistent
manner across environments: In each case, we show the
emergent complexity during training and report test performance in terms of the aggregate inter-quartile mean (IQM)
and optimality gap using the recently introduced rliable
library (Agarwal et al., 2021b).
We begin with a partially-observable navigation environment, where we test our agents’ transfer capabilities on
human-designed levels. Finally, we compare each method
on the continuous-control environment from Wang et al.
(2019), featuring a highly challenging distribution of training levels that requires the agent to master multiple behaviors to achieve strong performance. We also include a proofof-concept experiment in the Appendix (see Section B.1).

PAIRED

Minimax

DR

Shortest Path Length

60

40

ACCEL

40

20
0

PLR

Number of Blocks

20
0

Student PPO Updates

20000

0

0

Student PPO Updates

20000

Figure 3. Emergent complexity metrics for mazes generated during
training. Mean and standard error across 5 training seeds are shown.
IQM
ACCEL
PLR
DR
Minimax
PAIRED
0.0

0.3

Optimality Gap

0.6
0.9
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Min-Max Normalized Score

Figure 4. Aggregate zero-shot test performance in the maze domain.
DR

PLR

ACCEL

4.1. Partially Observable Navigation
We begin with a maze navigation environment based on
MiniGrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018), originally introduced in Dennis et al. (2020). Despite being a conceptually
simple environment, training robust agents in this domain
requires a large-scale experiment: Our agents train for 20k
updates (≈350M steps, see Table 10), learning an LSTMbased policy with a 147-dimensional partially-observable
observation. Our DR baseline samples between 0 and 60
blocks to place, providing a sufficient range for PLR to form
a curriculum. For ACCEL we begin with empty rooms and
randomly edit the block locations (by adding or removing
blocks), as well as the goal location. In Figure 3, we report
training performance and complexity metrics. We see that
ACCEL rapidly compounds complexity, leading to training levels with significantly higher block counts and longer
solution paths than other methods.
We evaluate the zero-shot transfer performance of each
method on a series of held-out test environments, as done in
prior works. For DR, PLR, and ACCEL, evaluation occurs
after 20k student PPO updates, focusing the comparison on
the effect of the curriculum. The minimax and PAIRED
results are those reported in Jiang et al. (2021a) at 250M
training steps (≈30k updates). As we see, ACCEL performs
at least as well as the next best method in almost all test environments, with particularly strong performance in Labyrinth
and Maze. As reported in Figure 4, ACCEL achieves dras-

Figure 5. Example levels generated by DR, PLR, and ACCEL.

tically stronger performance than all other methods in aggregate across all test environments: Its IQM approaches
a perfect solved rate compared to below 80% for the next
best method, PLR, with an 80.2% probability of improvement over PLR. Detailed, per environment test results are
provided in Figures 22 and 25 in Appendix B.4. Figure 5
shows example levels generated by each method. We see
ACCEL produces more structured mazes than the baselines.
Next, we consider an even more challenging setting based
on a larger version of PerfectMaze, a procedurally-generated
maze environment, shown in Figure 7, where levels have
51 × 51 tiles with a maximum episode length of over 5k
steps—an order of magnitude larger than training levels. We
evaluate agents for 100 episodes (per training seed), using
the same checkpoints in Figure 4. The results in Figure 7
show ACCEL significantly outperforms all baselines with a
success rate of 53% compared to the next best method, PLR,
which has a success rate of 25%, while all other methods
fail. Notably, successful agents approximately follow the
left-hand rule for solving single-component mazes.

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

et al., 2019), which was originally tested on BipedalWalker.
We train agents for 30k student updates, equivalent to between 1B to 2B total environment steps, depending on the
method (see Table 10). During training we evaluate agents
on both the simple BipedalWalker and more challenging BipedalWalker-Hardcore environments, in adFigure 6. Despite sharing a common ancestor, each of these levels
dition to four environments testing the agent’s effectiverequires different behaviors to solve. Left: The agent can approach
ness against specific, isolated challenges otherwise present
the goal by moving upwards or leftwards. Middle: The goal is on the
to varying degrees in training levels: {Stump, PitGap,
left. Right: The left path is blocked.
Stairs, Roughness}, shown in Figure 8.
Solved Rate

Stairs

PAIRED
Minimax

PitGap

DR
PLR

Stump

ACCEL
0.5

Figure 7. Zero-shot performance on a large procedurally-generated
maze environment. The bars show mean and standard error over 5
training seeds, each evaluated over 100 episodes. ACCEL achieves
over twice the success rate of the next best method.

We seek to understand the key drivers of ACCEL’s outperformance: Incremental changes to a level can lead to a diverse
batch of new ones (Sturtevant et al., 2020), which may move
those that are currently too hard or too easy towards the frontier of the agent’s capabilities. This diversity may prevent
overfitting. For example, in Figure 6, we see three edits of
the same level produced by ACCEL. Each has a similar initial observation, yet requires the agent to explore in different
directions to reach the goal, thereby pressuring the agent to
actively explore the environment. Further, making edits that
do not change the optimal solution path can be seen as a
form of data augmentation that changes the observation but
not the optimal policy. Data augmentation has been shown
to improve sample efficiency and robustness in RL (Laskin
et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al., 2021; Raileanu et al., 2021).
4.2. Walking in Challenging Terrain
Finally, we evaluate ACCEL in the BipedalWalker environment from Wang et al. (2019), a continuous-control environment with dense rewards. As in Wang et al. (2019), we
use a modified version of BipedalWalkerHardcore
from OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016). We include all
eight parameters in the design space, rather than only the
subset used in Wang et al. (2019). This environment is detailed at length in Appendix C.1. We run all baselines from
previous experiments, in addition to ALP-GMM (Portelas

Roughness

PAIRED

Minimax

ALP-GMM

300 BipedalWalkerHardcore 300

Test Return

0.0

0
300

0

0

Stairs

DR

PLR
300

ACCEL

PitGap

0

Stump

300 Roughness

0
30000
0
30000
Student PPO Updates

0

0

30000

Figure 8. Top: Examples of the four individual challenges in BipedalWalker. Bottom: Performance on test environments during training
(mean and standard error). Negative returns are omitted.
IQM

Optimality Gap

ACCEL
PLR
DR
ALP-GMM
Minimax
PAIRED
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75

0.50

0.75

1.00

Min-Max Normalized Score

Figure 9. Aggregate performance for ten seeds across all five BipedalWalker test environments.

After 30k PPO updates, we conduct a more rigorous evalu-

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

ation based on 100 test episodes in each test environment.
Figure 9 reports the aggregate results, normalized according
to a return range of [0, 300]. ACCEL significantly outperforms all baselines, achieving close to 75% of optimal performance, almost three times the performance of the best
baseline, PLR. All other baselines struggle, likely due to
the environment design space containing a high proportion
of levels not useful for learning. Faced with such challenging levels, agents may learn to resort to the locally optimal
behavior of preventing itself from falling (avoiding a -100
penalty), rather than attempt forward locomotion. Finally,
we see ALP-GMM performs poorly when the design space
is increased from 2D (as in Portelas et al. (2019)) to 8D.

PLR

Stump:Low
MAX: 3

Gap:High
MAX: 8

Stump:High
MAX: 3
Stair:Low
MAX: 3

Gap:Low
MAX: 8

ACCEL

Stump:Low
MAX: 3

Gap:High
MAX: 8

Roughness Stump:High
MAX: 8 MAX: 3

Stair:High
MAX: 3

Steps Updates
10k Stair:Low
MAX: 8
20k MAX: 3
30k

Gap:Low
MAX: 8
Roughness
MAX: 8

Stair:High
MAX: 3

Steps
MAX: 8

the difficulty of generated levels. A level meeting none
of these thresholds is considered easy, while meeting one,
two or three is considered challenging, very challenging or
extremely challenging respectively.
Table 1. Environment encoding thresholds for 5D BipedalWalker.
Stump Height (High)

Pit Gap (High)

Ground Roughness

≥ 2.4

≥6

≥ 4.5

In Figure 11, we show the composition of the ACCEL level
replay buffer during training. As we see, ACCEL produces
an increasing number of extremely challenging levels as
training progresses. This is a significant achievement given
that POET’s evolutionary curriculum is unable to create levels in this category, without including a complex steppingstone procedure (Wang et al., 2019). We thus see minimaxregret UED offers a computationally cheaper alternative
to producing such levels. Moreover, POET explicitly encourages the environment parameters to reach high values
through a novelty bonus, whereas the complexity discovered
by ACCEL is completely emergent, arising purely through
the pursuit of high-regret levels.

100

Level Replay Buffer Composition

Percent

80
60
40
20
Figure 10. Top: Rose plots of complexity metrics of BipedalWalker
levels discovered by PLR and ACCEL. Each line represents a solved
level from the associated checkpoint. All levels are among the top100 highest regret levels for the given checkpoint. Bottom: Two
levels created and solved by ACCEL.

Next we seek to understand the properties of the evolving
distribution of high-regret levels. We include all solved
levels from the top-100 regret levels after 10k, 20k, and 30k
student updates. For each level we show all eight parameters
in Figure 10 (top), with the PLR agent as a comparison. As
we see, ACCEL solves a large quantity of difficult levels
of comparable difficulty with other methods such as POET,
but uses a fraction of the compute. For comparison, ACCEL
sees 2.07B environment steps at 30k student updates, less
than 0.5% of that used in Wang et al. (2019).

0

10000

20000

Easy
Challenging

30000

40000

50000

Very Challenging
Extremely Challenging

Figure 11. Percent of ACCEL level replay buffer for each difficulty.
The complexity emerges purely in pursuit of high-regret levels.

4.3. POET Comparison

While POET seeks to discover a diverse population of specialists, each capable of solving a a specific extremely challenging level, ACCEL aims to train a single generalist. To
evaluate the generality of the ACCEL agent, we test all
agents trained in the 5D BipedalWalker environment on
the settings outlined in Figure 8, and report the results in
Table 2. Note that the Stairs environment is now out-ofdistribution, as the agent never sees stairs during training.
As we saw in the higher-dimensional setting, the ACCEL
agent is able to perform well across all settings.

For a more direct comparison with POET, we train each
method using 10 training seeds for 50k student PPO updates
with the smaller 5D BipedalWalker environment encoding
used in Wang et al. (2019). We use the thresholds provided
in Wang et al. (2019), summarized in Table 1, to evaluate

We further test all methods on a held-out distribution of
extremely challenging levels. In this case, we resample the
level parameters for each episode so to ensure they meet
all three criteria in Table 1. This leads to a highly diverse
set of test levels. To mitigate stochasticity influencing the

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design
Table 2. Test solved rates at 50k updates (mean and standard error)
for 10 runs of each method on 100 episodes. Extremely challenging
evaluation uses 1000 episodes due to the high diversity of levels.
Bold values are within one standard error of the best mean.
PLR
ALP-GMM
ACCEL
Stump
PitGap
Roughness
Stairs

0.04 ± 0.02
0.2 ± 0.09
0.23 ± 0.04
0.02 ± 0.0

0.07 ± 0.02
0.58 ± 0.08
0.13 ± 0.03
0.01 ± 0.0

0.44 ± 0.08
0.61 ± 0.08
0.73 ± 0.03
0.12 ± 0.02

Hardcore
Extreme

0.21 ± 0.04
0.01 ± 0.01

0.2 ± 0.04
0.02 ± 0.01

0.65 ± 0.02
0.12 ± 0.02

outcome, we evaluate each method over 1000 episodes. The
results are summarized in Table 2, where we see ACCEL
attains 12% average solved rate, while PLR and ALP-GMM
see 1% and 2% average solved rates respectively.
Finally, we seek to evaluate our agents on specific levels
produced by POET. We used the rose plots from Wang et al.
(2019) to create six extremely challenging environments,
each solved by one of the three POET runs. Unsurprisingly
our agents find these levels challenging and see low success
rates. We note that this is not a perfect comparison—POET
fixes the level generator’s random seed, thereby solving a
single level for each parameterization, while we repeatedly
sample different levels under the same parameterization.
Still, 9 out of 10 of our independent runs solved at least one
of the 6 environments at least once out of 100 trials. See the
Appendix (Table 7) for more detail on this experiment.
In summary, we believe ACCEL can produce levels of comparable complexity to POET, without a novelty bonus or
domain-specific heuristics, at the fraction of the compute
cost. Moreover, ACCEL produces a single agent robust
across environment challenges, while POET results in multiple agents, each tailored to individual challenges. Therefore,
we believe our method produces agents that are more robust,
and thus more generally capable.
Do we need to start simple? We conduct a simple ablation study on ACCEL to test the importance of the editing
mechanism and the inductive bias of starting simple. In
Figure 12 we show the performance of three approaches:
PLR (sample and replay DR levels), PLR+E (sample, replay,
and edit DR levels) and finally PLR+E+S (i.e. ACCEL).
As we see, editing levels leads to improved performance,
while starting simple is more important in BipedalWalker
environments.
4.4. Discussion and Limitations
Our experiments demonstrate that ACCEL is capable of
forming highly effective curricula in three challenging and
diverse environments. In MiniGrid, we showed it is possible
to produce complex mazes that facilitate zero-shot transfer to out-of-distribution, human-designed ones, including

MiniGrid
0.5
0.0

PLR

200
100
0
PLR+E

BipedalWalker

PLR+E+S

Figure 12. Aggregate returns for Editing ablations in MiniGrid and
BipedalWalker. E=editing, S=start simple.

those an order of magnitude larger than the training environment. Finally, in the BipedalWalker setting we produced
comparable level complexity as POET using a single agent
and a small fraction of the compute cost. Our experiments
provide evidence that ACCEL can be an effective curriculum method in more open-ended UED design spaces.
Importantly, the goal of our work differs from Wang et al.
(2019). The primary motivation of ACCEL is to produce
a single robust agent that can solve a wide range of challenges. ACCEL’s regret-based curriculum seeks to prioritize
the simplest levels that the agent cannot currently solve. In
contrast, POET co-evolves agent-environment pairs in order
to find specialized policies for solving a single highly specialized task. POET’s specialized agents may likely learn
to solve challenging environments outside the capabilities
of ACCEL’s generalist agents, but at the cost of potentially
overfitting to their paired levels. Thus, unlike ACCEL, the
policies produced by POET should not be expected to be
robust across the full distribution of levels. The relative
merits of POET and ACCEL thus highlight an important
trade-off between specialization and generalization, both
of which may ultimately be important for solving more
complex, larger scale problems.
While ACCEL’s simplicity is appealing, larger design spaces
may require additional mechanisms, like actively promoting diversity in level design. Moreover, ACCEL uses an
inductive bias by starting with the simplest base case (e.g.
an empty room), which may not always be possible in practice. In some settings, simple levels for agents may be more
complex in design, e.g. in a Hide-and-Seek game.

5. Related Work
In this section we provide a brief overview of related work.
We provide a more detailed discussion in Appendix A.
The goal of this work is to produce agents that are capable
of systematic generalization across a wide range of environments (Whiteson et al., 2009), which has recently been a
focus for the deep RL community (Packer et al., 2019; Igl
et al., 2019; Cobbe et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2021a; Zhang
et al., 2018b; Ghosh et al., 2021). A common approach for
producing robust agents is Domain Randomization (DR,
Jakobi (1997); Sadeghi and Levine (2017)), widely used in

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design
Table 3. The components of related approaches. Like POET, ACCEL evolves levels, but only trains a single agent while using a minimaxregret objective to ensure levels are solvable. PAIRED uses minimax regret to train the generator, and does not replay levels. Finally, PLR
curates levels using minimax regret, but relies solely on domain randomization for generation.

Algorithm

Generation Strategy

Generator Obj

Curation Obj

Output

POET (Wang et al., 2019)
PAIRED (Dennis et al., 2020)
PLR (Jiang et al., 2021b;a)

Evolution
Reinforcement Learning
Random

Minimax
Minimax Regret
None

MCC
None
Minimax Regret

Specialists
Generalist
Generalist

ACCEL

Random + Evolution

None

Minimax Regret

Generalist

robotics (Tobin et al., 2017; James et al., 2017; Andrychowicz et al., 2020; OpenAI et al., 2019).
The evolutionary component of ACCEL is inspired by
the open-ended creative potential of POET (Wang et al.,
2019; 2020; Brant and Stanley, 2017; Dharna et al., 2020),
which seeks to train a population of highly capable specialists. By contrast, ACCEL trains a single generally capable
agent with a regret-based curriculum as in PAIRED (Dennis et al., 2020) and Robust PLR (Jiang et al., 2021a) (see
Table 3). These methods for Unsupervised Environment Design (UED, Dennis et al., 2020), naturally relate to the field
of Automatic Curriculum Learning (ACL, Portelas et al.,
2020; Florensa et al., 2017; Baranes and Oudeyer, 2009),
with the key difference being that in UED all elements of
the POMDP are underspecified.
Our work also closely relates to previous environment design literature in the symbolic AI commmunity (Zhang and
Parkes, 2008; Zhang et al., 2009; Keren et al., 2017; 2019),
though our focus falls primarily on generating curricula.
Finally, we take inspiration from the field of procedural
content generation (PCG; Risi and Togelius, 2020; Justesen
et al., 2018), which seeks to produce a distribution of levels
for a given environment, often using machine learning (Summerville et al., 2018; Bhaumik et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021).
We are particularly inspired by PCGRL (Khalifa et al., 2020;
Earle et al., 2021a) which frames level design as an RL problem, making incremental changes to a level to maximize
some objective subject to game-specific constraints.

that ACCEL is capable of training robust agents in a series of challenging design spaces, where ACCEL agents
outperform the best-performing baselines.
We are excited by the many possibilities for extending how
ACCEL edits and maintains its population of high-regret
levels. The editing mechanism could encompass a wide variety of approaches, such as Neural Cellular Automata (Earle
et al., 2021b), controllable editors (Earle et al., 2021a), or
perturbing the latent space of a generative model (Fontaine
et al., 2021). Another possibility is to actively seek levels which are likely to produce useful levels in the future
(Gajewski et al., 2019). Moreover, ACCEL’s evolutionary
search may be expedited by introducing so-called extinction
events (Raup, 1986; Lehman and Miikkulainen, 2015), believed to play a crucial role in natural evolution. We did
not explore methods to encourage level diversity, but such
diversity is likely important for larger design spaces, such as
3D control tasks that transfer more directly to the real world.
It remains an open question whether producing sufficient
diversity would require a population, for example using
the domain-agnostic, population-based novelty objective
in Enhanced POET (Wang et al., 2020). We believe such
ideas at the intersection of evolution and adaptive curricula
can take us closer to producing a truly open-ended learning
process between the agent and the environment (Stanley
et al., 2017). Finally, we note that while ACCEL may be
an effective approach for automatically generating an effective curriculum, it may still be necessary to likewise adapt
the agent configuration (Parker-Holder et al., 2022) to most
effectively train agents in open-ended environments.

6. Conclusion and Future Work
We proposed ACCEL, a new method for unsupervised environment design (UED), that evolves a curriculum by editing
previously curated levels. Editing induces an evolutionary
process that leads to a wide variety of environments at the
frontier of the agent’s capabilities, producing curricula that
start simple and quickly compound in complexity. Thus,
ACCEL provides a principled regret-based curriculum that
exploits an evolutionary process to produce a broad spectrum of environment complexity matched to the agent’s current capabilities. Importantly, ACCEL avoids the need for
domain-specific heuristics. In our experiments, we showed

Acknowledgements
We thank Kenneth Stanley, Alessandro Lazaric, Ian Fox,
and Iryna Korshunova for insightful discussions, as well as
the anonymous reviewers for their useful feedback. This
work was funded by Meta AI.

References
Agarwal, R., Machado, M. C., Castro, P. S., and Bellemare,
M. G. (2021a). Contrastive behavioral similarity embeddings for generalization in reinforcement learning. In

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

International Conference on Learning Representations.
Agarwal, R., Schwarzer, M., Castro, P. S., Courville, A., and
Bellemare, M. G. (2021b). Deep reinforcement learning
at the edge of the statistical precipice. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems.
Andrychowicz, M., Crow, D., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Fong,
R., Welinder, P., McGrew, B., Tobin, J., Abbeel, P., and
Zaremba, W. (2017). Hindsight experience replay. In
Guyon, I., von Luxburg, U., Bengio, S., Wallach, H. M.,
Fergus, R., Vishwanathan, S. V. N., and Garnett, R., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
30.
Andrychowicz, O. M., Baker, B., Chociej, M., Józefowicz,
R., McGrew, B., Pachocki, J., Petron, A., Plappert, M.,
Powell, G., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Sidor, S., Tobin, J.,
Welinder, P., Weng, L., and Zaremba, W. (2020). Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International
Journal of Robotics Research, 39(1):3–20.

Campero, A., Raileanu, R., Kuttler, H., Tenenbaum, J. B.,
Rocktäschel, T., and Grefenstette, E. (2021). Learning
with AMIGo: Adversarially motivated intrinsic goals. In
International Conference on Learning Representations.
Chevalier-Boisvert, M., Willems, L., and Pal, S.
(2018). Minimalistic gridworld environment for OpenAI Gym. https://github.com/maximecb/
gym-minigrid.
Cobbe, K., Hesse, C., Hilton, J., and Schulman, J. (2020).
Leveraging procedural generation to benchmark reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2048–
2056.
Dennis, M., Jaques, N., Vinitsky, E., Bayen, A., Russell, S.,
Critch, A., and Levine, S. (2020). Emergent complexity and zero-shot transfer via unsupervised environment
design. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 33.

Ball, P. J., Lu, C., Parker-Holder, J., and Roberts, S. J.
(2021). Augmented world models facilitate zero-shot dynamics generalization from a single offline environment.
In The International Conference on Machine Learning.

Dharna, A., Togelius, J., and Soros, L. B. (2020). Cogeneration of game levels and game-playing agents. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Interactive Digital Entertainment, 16(1):203–209.

Baranes, A. and Oudeyer, P.-Y. (2009). Robust intrinsically
motivated exploration and active learning. pages 1 – 6.

Earle, S., Edwards, M., Khalifa, A., Bontrager, P., and
Togelius, J. (2021a). Learning controllable content generators. In IEEE Conference on Games (CoG).

Berner, C., Brockman, G., Chan, B., Cheung, V., Debiak, P.,
Dennison, C., Farhi, D., Fischer, Q., Hashme, S., Hesse,
C., Józefowicz, R., Gray, S., Olsson, C., Pachocki, J.,
Petrov, M., de Oliveira Pinto, H. P., Raiman, J., Salimans, T., Schlatter, J., Schneider, J., Sidor, S., Sutskever,
I., Tang, J., Wolski, F., and Zhang, S. (2019). Dota
2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning. CoRR,
abs/1912.06680.
Berthouze, L. and Lungarella, M. (2004). Motor skill acquisition under environmental perturbations: On the necessity of alternate freezing and freeing of degrees of
freedom. Adapt. Behav., 12(1):47–64.
Bhaumik, D., Khalifa, A., Green, M. C., and Togelius, J.
(2020). Tree search versus optimization approaches for
map generation. In AAAI 2020.
Brant, J. C. and Stanley, K. O. (2017). Minimal criterion
coevolution: A new approach to open-ended search. In
Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, GECCO ’17, page 67–74, New York,
NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Brockman, G., Cheung, V., Pettersson, L., Schneider, J.,
Schulman, J., Tang, J., and Zaremba, W. (2016). OpenAI
Gym.

Earle, S., Snider, J., Fontaine, M. C., Nikolaidis, S., and
Togelius, J. (2021b). Illuminating diverse neural cellular
automata for level generation.
Eimer, T., Biedenkapp, A., Hutter, F., and Lindauer, M.
(2021). Self-paced context evaluation for contextual reinforcement learning. In The International Conference on
Machine Learning.
Everett, R., Cobb, A., Markham, A., and Roberts, S. (2019).
Optimising worlds to evaluate and influence reinforcement learning agents. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent
Systems, AAMAS ’19.
Fang, K., Zhu, Y., Savarese, S., and Li, F.-F. (2021). Adaptive procedural task generation for hard-exploration problems. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Florensa, C., Held, D., Geng, X., and Abbeel, P. (2018).
Automatic goal generation for reinforcement learning
agents. In Dy, J. and Krause, A., editors, Proceedings of
the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 1515–1528. PMLR.

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

Florensa, C., Held, D., Wulfmeier, M., Zhang, M., and
Abbeel, P. (2017). Reverse curriculum generation for
reinforcement learning. In 1st Annual Conference on
Robot Learning, CoRL 2017, Mountain View, California,
USA, November 13-15, 2017, Proceedings, volume 78
of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
482–495. PMLR.
Fontaine, M. C., Hsu, Y., Zhang, Y., Tjanaka, B., and Nikolaidis, S. (2021). On the importance of environments in
human-robot coordination. In Shell, D. A., Toussaint, M.,
and Hsieh, M. A., editors, Robotics: Science and Systems
XVII, Virtual Event, July 12-16, 2021.
Gajewski, A., Clune, J., Stanley, K. O., and Lehman, J.
(2019). Evolvability ES: Scalable and direct optimization
of evolvability. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, GECCO ’19, pages
107–115, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Ghosh, D., Rahme, J., Kumar, A., Zhang, A., Adams, R. P.,
and Levine, S. (2021). Why generalization in rl is difficult: Epistemic pomdps and implicit partial observability.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06277.
Gur, I., Jaques, N., Malta, K., Tiwari, M., Lee, H., and
Faust, A. (2021). Adversarial environment generation for
learning to navigate the web.
Hu, H. and Foerster, J. N. (2020). Simplified action decoder for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In 8th
International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020.
OpenReview.net.
Igl, M., Ciosek, K., Li, Y., Tschiatschek, S., Zhang, C.,
Devlin, S., and Hofmann, K. (2019). Generalization in
reinforcement learning with selective noise injection and
information bottleneck. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Jakobi, N. (1997). Evolutionary robotics and the radical envelope-of-noise hypothesis. Adaptive Behavior,
6(2):325–368.
James, S., Davison, A. J., and Johns, E. (2017). Transferring
end-to-end visuomotor control from simulation to real
world for a multi-stage task. In 1st Conference on Robot
Learning.
Jiang, M., Dennis, M., Parker-Holder, J., Foerster, J., Grefenstette, E., and Rocktäschel, T. (2021a). Replay-guided
adversarial environment design. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems.
Jiang, M., Grefenstette, E., and Rocktäschel, T. (2021b).
Prioritized level replay. In The International Conference
on Machine Learning.

Juliani, A., Khalifa, A., Berges, V., Harper, J., Teng, E.,
Henry, H., Crespi, A., Togelius, J., and Lange, D. (2019).
Obstacle Tower: A Generalization Challenge in Vision,
Control, and Planning. In IJCAI.
Justesen, N., Torrado, R. R., Bontrager, P., Khalifa, A.,
Togelius, J., and Risi, S. (2018). Procedural level generation improves generality of deep reinforcement learning.
CoRR, abs/1806.10729.
Keren, S., Pineda, L., Gal, A., Karpas, E., and Zilberstein, S.
(2017). Equi-reward utility maximizing design in stochastic environments. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling.
Keren, S., Pineda, L., Gal, A., Karpas, E., and Zilberstein,
S. (2019). Efficient heuristic search for optimal environment redesign. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, volume 29, pages 246–254.
Khalifa, A., Bontrager, P., Earle, S., and Togelius, J. (2020).
Pcgrl: Procedural content generation via reinforcement
learning. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment,
16(1):95–101.
Kirk, R., Zhang, A., Grefenstette, E., and Rocktäschel, T.
(2021). A survey of generalisation in deep reinforcement
learning. CoRR, abs/2111.09794.
Klink, P., Abdulsamad, H., Belousov, B., and Peters, J.
(2019). Self-paced contextual reinforcement learning. In
Conference on Robot Learning.
Kostrikov, I. (2018).
Pytorch implementations
of
reinforcement
learning
algorithms.
https://github.com/ikostrikov/
pytorch-a2c-ppo-acktr-gail.
Kostrikov, I., Yarats, D., and Fergus, R. (2021). Image augmentation is all you need: Regularizing deep reinforcement learning from pixels. In International Conference
on Learning Representations.
Küttler, H., Nardelli, N., Miller, A. H., Raileanu, R., Selvatici, M., Grefenstette, E., and Rocktäschel, T. (2020).
The NetHack Learning Environment. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
Laskin, M., Lee, K., Stooke, A., Pinto, L., Abbeel, P., and
Srinivas, A. (2020). Reinforcement learming with augmented data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33.
Lehman, J. and Miikkulainen, R. (2015). Extinction events
can accelerate evolution. PloS one, 10(8):e0132886.

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

Liu, J., Snodgrass, S., Khalifa, A., Risi, S., Yannakakis,
G. N., and Togelius, J. (2021). Deep learning for procedural content generation. Neural Comput. Appl., 33(1):19–
37.
Matiisen, T., Oliver, A., Cohen, T., and Schulman, J. (2020).
Teacher-student curriculum learning. IEEE Trans. Neural
Networks Learn. Syst., 31(9):3732–3740.
Mazumdar, E., Ratliff, L. J., and Sastry, S. S. (2020). On
gradient-based learning in continuous games. SIAM J.
Math. Data Sci., 2(1):103–131.
Mehta, B., Diaz, M., Golemo, F., Pal, C. J., and Paull, L.
(2020). Active domain randomization. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Robot Learning.

Perez-Liebana, D., Liu, J., Khalifa, A., Gaina, R. D., Togelius, J., and Lucas, S. M. (2019). General video game
ai: A multitrack framework for evaluating agents, games,
and content generation algorithms. IEEE Transactions
on Games, 11(3):195–214.
Pinto, L., Davidson, J., and Gupta, A. (2017). Supervision
via competition: Robot adversaries for learning tasks. In
2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pages 1601–1608.
Pong, V., Dalal, M., Lin, S., Nair, A., Bahl, S., and Levine,
S. (2020). Skew-fit: State-covering self-supervised reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 7783–
7792.

Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Graves, A.,
Antonoglou, I., Wierstra, D., and Riedmiller, M. A.
(2013). Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning.
ArXiv, abs/1312.5602.

Portelas, R., Colas, C., Hofmann, K., and Oudeyer, P. (2019).
Teacher algorithms for curriculum learning of deep RL
in continuously parameterized environments. In Kaelbling, L. P., Kragic, D., and Sugiura, K., editors, 3rd Annual Conference on Robot Learning, CoRL 2019, Osaka,
Japan, October 30 - November 1, 2019, Proceedings, volume 100 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 835–853. PMLR.

Modi, A., Jiang, N., Singh, S., and Tewari, A. (2017).
Markov decision processes with continuous side information. In Algorithmic Learning Theory.

Portelas, R., Colas, C., Weng, L., Hofmann, K., and
Oudeyer, P.-Y. (2020). Automatic curriculum learning for
deep rl: A short survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04664.

OpenAI, Akkaya, I., Andrychowicz, M., Chociej, M.,
Litwin, M., McGrew, B., Petron, A., Paino, A., Plappert, M., Powell, G., Ribas, R., Schneider, J., Tezak, N.,
Tworek, J., Welinder, P., Weng, L., Yuan, Q., Zaremba,
W., and Zhang, L. (2019). Solving rubik’s cube with a
robot hand. CoRR, abs/1910.07113.

Pugh, J. K., Soros, L. B., and Stanley, K. O. (2016). Quality
diversity: A new frontier for evolutionary computation.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 3:40.

Mendonca, R., Rybkin, O., Daniilidis, K., Hafner, D., and
Pathak, D. (2021). Discovering and achieving goals via
world models.

OpenAI, O., Plappert, M., Sampedro, R., Xu, T., Akkaya,
I., Kosaraju, V., Welinder, P., D’Sa, R., Petron, A.,
de Oliveira Pinto, H. P., Paino, A., Noh, H., Weng, L.,
Yuan, Q., Chu, C., and Zaremba, W. (2021). Asymmetric
self-play for automatic goal discovery in robotic manipulation.
Packer, C., Gao, K., Kos, J., Krahenbuhl, P., Koltun, V.,
and Song, D. (2019). Assessing generalization in deep
reinforcement learning.
Parker-Holder, J., Rajan, R., Song, X., Biedenkapp, A.,
Miao, Y., Eimer, T., Zhang, B., Nguyen, V., Calandra,
R., Faust, A., Hutter, F., and Lindauer, M. (2022). Automated reinforcement learning (autorl): A survey and
open problems. CoRR, abs/2201.03916.
Peng, X. B., Andrychowicz, M., Zaremba, W., and Abbeel,
P. (2017). Sim-to-real transfer of robotic control with
dynamics randomization. CoRR, abs/1710.06537.

Racaniere, S., Lampinen, A., Santoro, A., Reichert, D.,
Firoiu, V., and Lillicrap, T. (2020). Automated curriculum generation through setter-solver interactions. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Raileanu, R., Goldstein, M., Yarats, D., Kostrikov, I., and
Fergus, R. (2021). Automatic data augmentation for generalization in deep reinforcement learning. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Raparthy, S. C., Mehta, B., Golemo, F., and Paull, L. (2020).
Generating automatic curricula via self-supervised active
domain randomization. CoRR, abs/2002.07911.
Raup, D. M. (1986). Biological extinction in earth history.
Science, 231(4745):1528–1533.
Risi, S. and Togelius, J. (2020). Increasing generality in
machine learning through procedural content generation.
Nature Machine Intelligence, 2.
Sadeghi, F. and Levine, S. (2017). CAD2RL: real singleimage flight without a single real image. In Amato, N. M.,
Srinivasa, S. S., Ayanian, N., and Kuindersma, S., editors,

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

Robotics: Science and Systems XIII, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA,
July 12-16, 2017.
Samvelyan, M., Kirk, R., Kurin, V., Parker-Holder, J., Jiang,
M., Hambro, E., Petroni, F., Kuttler, H., Grefenstette, E.,
and Rocktäschel, T. (2021). Minihack the planet: A sandbox for open-ended reinforcement learning research. In
Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track.
Savage, L. J. (1951). The theory of statistical decision.
Journal of the American Statistical association.
Schmidhuber, J. (2013). Powerplay: Training an increasingly general problem solver by continually searching
for the simplest still unsolvable problem. Frontiers in
Psychology, 4:313.
Schulman, J., Moritz, P., Levine, S., Jordan, M., and Abbeel,
P. (2016). High-dimensional continuous control using
generalized advantage estimation. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR).
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and
Klimov, O. (2016-2018). Proximal policy optimization
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347.

Sturtevant, N., Decroocq, N., Tripodi, A., and Guzdial, M.
(2020). The unexpected consequence of incremental design changes. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment, volume 16, pages 130–136.
Sukhbaatar, S., Lin, Z., Kostrikov, I., Synnaeve, G., Szlam,
A., and Fergus, R. (2018). Intrinsic motivation and automatic curricula via asymmetric self-play. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Summerville, A., Snodgrass, S., Guzdial, M., Holmgård,
C., Hoover, A. K., Isaksen, A., Nealen, A., and Togelius,
J. (2018). Procedural content generation via machine
learning (PCGML). IEEE Trans. Games, 10(3):257–270.
Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. (1998). Introduction to
Reinforcement Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
USA, 1st edition.
Team, O. E. L., Stooke, A., Mahajan, A., Barros, C., Deck,
C., Bauer, J., Sygnowski, J., Trebacz, M., Jaderberg, M.,
Mathieu, M., McAleese, N., Bradley-Schmieg, N., Wong,
N., Porcel, N., Raileanu, R., Hughes-Fitt, S., Dalibard, V.,
and Czarnecki, W. M. (2021). Open-ended learning leads
to generally capable agents. CoRR, abs/2107.12808.

Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L.,
van den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I.,
Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., Dieleman, S., Grewe,
D., Nham, J., Kalchbrenner, N., Sutskever, I., Lillicrap,
T. P., Leach, M., Kavukcuoglu, K., Graepel, T., and Hassabis, D. (2016). Mastering the game of Go with deep
neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529:484–489.

Tobin, J., Fong, R., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Zaremba, W., and
Abbeel, P. (2017). Domain randomization for transferring
deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In
2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems, IROS 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
September 24-28, 2017, pages 23–30. IEEE.

Silver, D., Singh, S., Precup, D., and Sutton, R. S. (2021).
Reward is enough. Artificial Intelligence, 299:103535.

Togelius, J. and Schmidhuber, J. (2008). An experiment in
automatic game design. In 2008 IEEE Symposium On
Computational Intelligence and Games, pages 111–118.

Song, X., Jiang, Y., Tu, S., Du, Y., and Neyshabur, B. (2020).
Observational overfitting in reinforcement learning. In
8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30,
2020. OpenReview.net.

Stanley, K., Clune, J., Lehman, J., and Miikkulainen, R.
(2019). Designing neural networks through neuroevolution. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1.

Vinyals, O., Babuschkin, I., Czarnecki, W. M., Mathieu, M.,
Dudzik, A., Chung, J., Choi, D. H., Powell, R., Ewalds,
T., Georgiev, P., Oh, J., Horgan, D., Kroiss, M., Danihelka, I., Huang, A., Sifre, L., Cai, T., Agapiou, J. P.,
Jaderberg, M., Vezhnevets, A. S., Leblond, R., Pohlen, T.,
Dalibard, V., Budden, D., Sulsky, Y., Molloy, J., Paine,
T. L., Gülçehre, Ç., Wang, Z., Pfaff, T., Wu, Y., Ring,
R., Yogatama, D., Wünsch, D., McKinney, K., Smith, O.,
Schaul, T., Lillicrap, T. P., Kavukcuoglu, K., Hassabis,
D., Apps, C., and Silver, D. (2019). Grandmaster level
in starcraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning.
Nat., 575(7782):350–354.

Stanley, K. O., Lehman, J., and Soros, L. (2017). Openendedness: The last grand challenge you’ve never heard
of. While open-endedness could be a force for discovering
intelligence, it could also be a component of AI itself.

Wang, R., Lehman, J., Clune, J., and Stanley, K. O. (2019).
Paired open-ended trailblazer (POET): endlessly generating increasingly complex and diverse learning environments and their solutions. CoRR, abs/1901.01753.

Soros, L. and Stanley, K. (2014). Identifying necessary
conditions for open-ended evolution through the artificial life world of chromaria. Artificial Life Conference
Proceedings, (26):793–800.

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

Wang, R., Lehman, J., Rawal, A., Zhi, J., Li, Y., Clune, J.,
and Stanley, K. (2020). Enhanced POET: Open-ended
reinforcement learning through unbounded invention of
learning challenges and their solutions. In III, H. D.
and Singh, A., editors, Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119
of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
9940–9951. PMLR.
Whiteson, S., Tanner, B., Taylor, M. E., and Stone, P. (2009).
Generalized domains for empirical evaluations in reinforcement learning.
Zhang, A., Ballas, N., and Pineau, J. (2018a). A dissection
of overfitting and generalization in continuous reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1806.07937.
Zhang, C., Vinyals, O., Munos, R., and Bengio, S. (2018b).
A study on overfitting in deep reinforcement learning.
CoRR, abs/1804.06893.
Zhang, H., Chen, Y., and Parkes, D. (2009). A general
approach to environment design with one agent. In Proceedings of the 21st International Jont Conference on
Artifical Intelligence, IJCAI’09, page 2002–2008.
Zhang, H. and Parkes, D. (2008). Value-based policy teaching with active indirect elicitation. In Proceedings of
the 23rd National Conference on Artificial Intelligence Volume 1, AAAI’08, page 208–214. AAAI Press.
Zhang, Y., Abbeel, P., and Pinto, L. (2020). Automatic
curriculum learning through value disagreement. In
Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M. F.,
and Lin, H., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 7648–7659. Curran
Associates, Inc.

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

A. Extended Related Work
Our paper focuses on testing agents on distributions of environments, long known to be crucial for evaluating the generality of
RL agents (Whiteson et al., 2009). The inability of deep RL agents to reliably generalize across distributions of environment
configurations has drawn considerable attention (Packer et al., 2019; Igl et al., 2019; Cobbe et al., 2020; Agarwal et al.,
2021a; Zhang et al., 2018b; Ghosh et al., 2021), with policies often failing to adapt to changes in the observation (Song
et al., 2020), dynamics (Ball et al., 2021), or reward (Zhang et al., 2018a). In this work, we seek to provide agents with a set
of training levels to produce a policy that is robust to such variations.
In particular, we focus on the Unsupervised Environment Design (UED, Dennis et al., 2020) paradigm, which aims to design
environment directly, such that they induce experiences that result in learning more robust policies. Domain Randomization
(DR, Jakobi, 1997; Sadeghi and Levine, 2017), which simply randomizes the environment configuration, can be viewed as
the most basic form of UED. DR has been particularly successful in areas such as robotics (Tobin et al., 2017; James et al.,
2017; Andrychowicz et al., 2020; OpenAI et al., 2019), with extensions that actively update the DR distribution (Mehta
et al., 2020; Raparthy et al., 2020). This paper directly extends Prioritized Level Replay (PLR, Jiang et al., 2021b;a)), a
method for curating DR levels such that only those with high learning potential are revisited by the student agent for training.
PLR is related to TSCL (Matiisen et al., 2020), self-paced learning (Klink et al., 2019; Eimer et al., 2021), and ALP-GMM
(Portelas et al., 2019), which all seek to maintain and update distributions over informative environment parameterizations
based on the recent performance of the agent. Recently, a method similar to PLR was shown to be capable of producing
generally-capable agents in a simulated game world with a smooth space of levels (Team et al., 2021).
Dennis et al. (2020) first formalized UED and introduced the PAIRED algorithm, a minimax-regret (Savage, 1951) UED
algorithm whereby an environment adversary learns to present levels that maximize regret, approximated as the difference in
performance between the main student agent and a second student agent. PAIRED produces agents with improved zero-shot
transfer to unseen environments and has been extended to train agents that can robustly navigate websites (Gur et al., 2021).
Adversarial objectives have also been considered in robotics (Pinto et al., 2017) and in directly searching for situations in
which the agent sees the weakest performance (Everett et al., 2019). POET (Wang et al., 2019; 2020) considers co-evolving
a population of minimax environments and agents that solve them. ACCEL harnesses the evolutionary potential of POET
while training only a single agent, which takes significantly less resources, while also avoiding the agent selection problem.
UED is related to Automatic Curriculum Learning (ACL, Portelas et al., 2020; Florensa et al., 2017; Baranes and Oudeyer,
2009), which seeks to provide an adaptive curriculum of increasingly challenging tasks or goals (Andrychowicz et al.,
2017). This setting differs from a general UPOMDP, which aims to actively generate the entire environment given a domain
specification and where the free parameters, e.g. the task or goal specifier, are typically not fully observed. In Asymmetric
Self-Play (Sukhbaatar et al., 2018; OpenAI et al., 2021), the agent’s goal is based on reversing the trajectory of another; this
process leads to effective curricula for robotic manipulation tasks. AMIGo (Campero et al., 2021) and APT-Gen (Fang et al.,
2021) produce adaptive curricula for hard-exploration, goal-conditioned problems. Many ACL methods focus on learning to
reach goals or states with high uncertainty (Racaniere et al., 2020; Pong et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020), including latent
states inside a generative model (Florensa et al., 2018; Mendonca et al., 2021).
Automatic environment design has also been considered in the symbolic AI community as a means to shape an agent’s
decisions (Zhang and Parkes, 2008; Zhang et al., 2009) Automated environment design (Keren et al., 2017; 2019) seeks to
redesign specific levels to improve the agent’s performance within them. In contrast, UED adapts curricula that improves
performance across levels.
Our work also relates to the field of procedural content generation (PCG; Risi and Togelius, 2020; Justesen et al., 2018),
which has studied the algorithmic generation of game levels for over a decade (Togelius and Schmidhuber, 2008). Popular
PCG environments used in RL include the Procgen Benchmark (Cobbe et al., 2020), MiniGrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al.,
2018), Obstacle Tower (Juliani et al., 2019), GVGAI (Perez-Liebana et al., 2019), and the NetHack Learning Environment
(Küttler et al., 2020). This work uses the MiniHack environment (Samvelyan et al., 2021), which provides a flexible
framework for creating diverse environments. Many recent PCG methods use machine learning (Summerville et al., 2018;
Bhaumik et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021). PCGRL (Khalifa et al., 2020; Earle et al., 2021a) frames level design as an RL
problem, whereby the design policy incrementally changes the level to maximize some objective subject to game-specific
constraints. Unlike ACCEL, it makes use of hand-designed dense rewards and focuses on the design of levels for human
players, rather than as an avenue to training highly-robust agents.

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

B. Additional Experimental Results
B.1. Learning with Lava
Here we explore a simple proof of concept: a grid environment, where the agent must navigate to a goal in the presence
of lava blocks. The grid is only 7 × 7, but remains challenging as the episode terminates with zero reward if the agent
touches the lava. This dynamic makes exploration more difficult by penalizing random actions. While toy, such challenges
may be relevant in real-world, safety-critical settings, where agents may wish to avoid events causing early termination
during training. For DR and PLR, the random generator samples the number of lava tiles to place from the range [0, 20]. For
ACCEL, we use a generator that produces empty rooms and then proceeds to edit the levels by adding or removing lava tiles.
The environment is built with MiniHack (Samvelyan et al., 2021) and is fully observable with a high-dimensional input. The
full environment details are provided in C.1.
Figure 13 shows the results of running each method over 5 random seeds. Despite starting with empty rooms, ACCEL
quickly produces levels with more lava than the other methods, while also attaining higher training returns, reaching
near-perfect performance on its training distribution. This behavior is entirely driven by the pursuit of high-regret levels,
which constantly seeks the frontier of the agent’s capabilities. PLR is able to produce a similar training profile to ACCEL,
but achieves lower values for each complexity metric.

PAIRED
DR
PLR
ACCEL
Mean Agent Return Shortest Path Length10Number of Lava Tiles
1.0
8

8

6

0.5

6

4
0.0

0

1000

4
0

1000

Student PPO Updates

0

1000

Figure 13. Training return and emergent complexity in Lava Grid. The plots report
the mean and standard error over 5 seeds.

We evaluate each agent on a series of test levels after 1000 PPO updates (approximately 20M timesteps), and report the
aggregate results in Figure 14, where we see that ACCEL is the best performing method. Extended results are shown in
Table 4. The first three test environments (Empty, 10 Tiles and 20 Tiles) evaluate the performance of the agent within its
training distribution, while we also include a held-out human designed environment, LavaCrossing S9N1, ported from
MiniGrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018). As we see, ACCEL performs best on all of the in-distribution environments
(whose levels can be directly sampled in the training distribution), while also being only one of two approaches to get
meaningfully above zero in the human designed task.
IQM

Optimality Gap

ACCEL
PLR
DR
Minimax
PAIRED
0.30

0.45 0.60
0.45
Min-Max Normalized Score

0.60

Figure 14. Lava Grid aggregate test performance.
Table 4. Test performance in in-distribution and out-of-distribution environments. Each entry is the mean (and standard error) of 5
independent training runs, where each run is evaluated for 100 trials on each environment. † indicates the generator’s per-tile lava
distribution is binomial and the generator can place lava in 20 blocks. ‡ indicates the generator first samples the number of lava tiles to
place (in [0, 20]), then places that many at random locations. Bold values are within one standard error of the best mean.
Test Environment

PAIRED

Minimax

DR†

PLR†

DR‡

PLR‡

ACCEL

Empty
10 Tiles
20 Tiles
LavaCrossing S9N1

0.77 ± 0.03
0.12 ± 0.03
0.06 ± 0.01
0.0 ± 0.0

0.76 ± 0.02
0.05 ± 0.01
0.11 ± 0.04
0.0 ± 0.0

0.81 ± 0.03
0.12 ± 0.02
0.06 ± 0.01
0.0 ± 0.0

0.97 ± 0.03
0.35 ± 0.18
0.15 ± 0.09
0.01 ± 0.01

0.89 ± 0.05
0.33 ± 0.15
0.23 ± 0.12
0.05 ± 0.05

0.96 ± 0.04
0.3 ± 0.05
0.25 ± 0.06
0.01 ± 0.0

1.0 ± 0.0
0.49 ± 0.07
0.35 ± 0.08
0.05 ± 0.04

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

B.2. Level Evolution
In Fig 15 and 16, we show levels produced by ACCEL for the MiniHack lava environment and MiniGrid mazes respectively.
Each step along the evolutionary process produces a level that has high learning potential at that point in training.

Figure 15. Levels generated by ACCEL. Each level along the evolutionary path is at the frontier for the student agent at that stage of
training. As we can see, the edits compound to produce a series of challenges: In the first level the lava gradually surrounds the agent, such
that they can initially explore in multiple directions, but near the end the task can only be solved by going down and to the right. In the
middle row, we see a level where the agent has a direct path to the goal, but a corridor is evolved over time to become increasingly narrow,
before being filled in so the agent has to go around it. Finally in the bottom row the level begins with simple augmentations before moving
the agent behind a barrier, which results in a challenging task where the agent has to move in a diagonal direction to escape the lava.

Figure 16. The evolution of a single level the MiniGrid environment, starting from top-left, ending bottom-right. Throughout the process
the agent experiences a diverse set of challenges.

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

Figure 17. Maze evolution. Top row shows starting levels, originally included in the PLR buffer due to having high positive value loss.
After many edits (up to 40), ACCEL produces the bottom row, which were all selected from the top-50 levels in terms of PLR scores
after 10k gradient steps. As we see, the same level can produce distinct future levels, in some cases multiple high-regret levels.

Base Levels

10k Student Updates

20k Student Updates

30k Student Updates

Figure 18. Levels created and solved by ACCEL in the BipedalWalker environment. At the beginning (top row) levels are initialized
with low values for environment parameters, encoding the range of obstacle sizes. After several edits, we reach challenging scenarios
like steep staircases or high stumps. By the end of training, we see a diverse combination of multiple challenges.

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

B.3. The Expanding Frontier
Here we analyze the performance of agents on levels produced by ACCEL. We inspect four agent checkpoints, from 5k, 10k,
15k and 20k student updates. In Figure 19 we show four generations of a level. We see that the later generations become
harder for the 5k checkpoint, while the 20k checkpoint sees the highest return from the more complex level in Gen 63.
Generation 27

Generation 45

Generation 53

Generation 63

Student Agent Checkpoint:

Figure 19. The Evolving Frontier. The top row shows four levels from the same lineage, at generations 27, 45, 53 and 63. Underneath
each is a bar plot showing the return and positive value loss (PVL) for four different ACCEL policies, checkpointed at 5k, 10k, 15k and
20k PPO updates. At generation 27, all four checkpoints can solve the level, but the 5k checkpoint has the highest learning potential
(PVL). On the right we see that by generation 63, only the 15k and 20k checkpoints are able to achieve a high return on the level.

<30

30-45

1

1

45-60

1

>65

Returns

1

0
0.07

0.00

0.00

0
0.07

0
0.07

PVL

0
0.07

0.00

5000

10000

0.00

15000

20000

Figure 20. Aggregate metrics for each band of generations. For example, “30-45” refers to all the levels between generation 30-45. The
later generation levels are harder for the early agents to solve, while the early agents have higher return and PVL for the earlier levels.

In Figure 20 we show all generations for the level included in Figure 19, grouped by generation. We then show the mean
return and PVL for all four agent checkpoints. We find the 20k checkpoint sees the highest learning potential in levels from
later generations, while the 5k checkpoint sees the lowest return on these levels. Next in Figure 21 we show data for all
generations of 20 levels which were present in the 20k checkpoint replay buffer and their ancestors in the 5k checkpoint
buffer. For each checkpoint, we visualize the solved rate for each of these levels based the color of the point for each level,
plotted along axes corresponding to shortest path length and number of blocks. The 5k checkpoint can only reliably solve
the shorter-path levels with low block count. In contrast, the 20k checkpoint performs well across all sampled levels.

Shortest Path

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

20
15
10
5
0

5k

0

25
50
75
Number of Blocks

20
15
10
5
0

10k

0

15k

20
15
10
5
0

25
50
75
0
25
50
75
Number of Blocks
Number of Blocks
Solved Rate

>0.75

0.25-0.5

0.5-0.75

20
15
10
5
0

20k

0

25
50
75
Number of Blocks

<0.25

Figure 21. How do complexity metrics relate to difficulty? The plot shows the block count and shortest path length. From left to right we
evaluate the agents at four checkpoints: 5k, 10k, 15k, 20k PPO updates. The color represents the solved rate. As we see, the 5k agent is
unable to solve the levels with higher block count and longer paths to the goal, while the 20k agent is able to solve almost all levels.

B.4. Full Experimental Results
Partially-Observable Navigation Next we show the extended results for the MiniGrid experiments. We use a series of
challenging zero-shot environments (see Figure 22), introduced in the UED literature (Dennis et al., 2020; Jiang et al.,
2021a). We include the full results in Table 5 and bar plots of the same data in Figure 25.
We also include an additional version of ACCEL using the same generator as the DR and PLR baselines, thus editing more
complex base levels. This removes the prior that it is beneficial to begin with simple empty rooms. As we see, both versions
of ACCEL significantly outperform the baselines. Particularly in the more complex environments like Labyrinth, we see
large gains compared to baselines. Also note that PLR outperforms all other baselines, and ACCEL outperforms PLR. We
show report these results in the Table 22, as well as show more robust comparison metrics provided by rliable (Agarwal
et al., 2021b) in Figure 24.
SixteenRooms

SixteenRooms2

SmallCorridor*

LargeCorridor*

SimpleCrossing*

FourRooms*

Labyrinth

Labyrinth2

Maze

Maze2

Maze3

PerfectMaze*

Figure 22. MiniGrid Zero-Shot Environments. Those with an asterisk are procedurally generated: For SmallCorridor and LargeCorridor,
the position of the goal can be in any of the corridors. SimpleCrossing and FourRooms are from Chevalier-Boisvert et al. (2018), and
PerfectMaze, from Jiang et al. (2021a).

16Rooms 16Rooms2 Crossing 1 FourRooms SmCorridor LgCorridor Labyrinth Labyrinth21
1

1

0

0

1

1

1

0

0

1

Maze

1

Maze2 1 Maze3 PerfectMaze
1

Solved Rate

1

0

0

0

PAIRED

Minimax

DR

0

PLR

0

0

ACCEL

0

0

Figure 23. Zero-shot transfer results in out-of-distribution mazes. Agents are evaluated for 100 episodes on human-designed mazes.
Plots show mean and standard error for each environment, across five runs.

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design
Table 5. Zero-Shot transfer to human-designed environments. Each entry corresponds to the mean and standard error of 5 training runs,
where each run is evaluated for 100 trials on each environment. † indicates the generator first samples the number of blocks to place in
[0, 60], then places that many at random locations. ‡ indicates the generator produces only empty rooms. Bold values are within one
standard error of the best mean. ⋆ indicates a statistically significant improvement against PLR (p < 0.05 via Welch’s t-test). All methods
are evaluated after 20k student updates, aside from PAIRED and Minimax, which are evaluated at ≈30k updates.

Environment

PAIRED

Minimax

DR†

PLR†

ACCEL†

ACCEL‡

16Rooms
16Rooms2
SimpleCrossing
FourRooms
SmallCorridor
LargeCorridor
Labyrinth
Labyrinth2
Maze
Maze2
Maze3
PerfectMaze (M)

0.63 ± 0.14
0.53 ± 0.15
0.55 ± 0.11
0.46 ± 0.06
0.37 ± 0.09
0.27 ± 0.08
0.45 ± 0.14
0.38 ± 0.12
0.02 ± 0.01
0.37 ± 0.13
0.3 ± 0.12
0.32 ± 0.06

0.01 ± 0.01
0.0 ± 0.0
0.11 ± 0.04
0.14 ± 0.03
0.14 ± 0.09
0.14 ± 0.09
0.0 ± 0.0
0.0 ± 0.0
0.0 ± 0.0
0.0 ± 0.0
0.0 ± 0.0
0.01 ± 0.0

0.87 ± 0.06
0.53 ± 0.18
0.57 ± 0.15
0.77 ± 0.1
1.0 ± 0.0
0.64 ± 0.05
0.45 ± 0.23
0.54 ± 0.18
0.43 ± 0.23
0.49 ± 0.16
0.69 ± 0.19
0.45 ± 0.1

0.95 ± 0.03
0.49 ± 0.17
0.87 ± 0.05
0.64 ± 0.04
0.89 ± 0.05
0.79 ± 0.13
0.55 ± 0.23
0.66 ± 0.18
0.54 ± 0.19
0.74 ± 0.13
0.75 ± 0.12
0.62 ± 0.09

1.0 ± 0.0
0.62 ± 0.22
0.92 ± 0.08
0.9 ± 0.08
0.88 ± 0.11
0.94 ± 0.05
0.97 ± 0.03
1.0 ± 0.01
0.52 ± 0.26
0.93 ± 0.04
0.94 ± 0.06
0.88 ± 0.12

1.0 ± 0.0
0.92 ± 0.06
0.84 ± 0.16
0.72 ± 0.07
1.0 ± 0.0
1.0 ± 0.0
0.86 ± 0.14
1.0 ± 0.0
0.72 ± 0.24
1.0 ± 0.0
0.8 ± 0.1
0.93 ± 0.07

Mean

0.39 ± 0.03

0.05 ± 0.01

0.62 ± 0.05

0.71 ± 0.04

0.88 ± 0.04⋆

0.9 ± 0.03⋆

Algorithm X
ACCEL (Empty)

Algorithm Y
PLR

ACCEL (DR)

PLR
0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

P(X > Y)
Figure 24. Probability of improvement of ACCEL over PLR across all evaluation environments in Figure 22, using the open-source
notebook from Agarwal et al. (2021b). The probability of improvement represents the probability that Algorithm X outperforms
Algorithm Y on a new task from the same distribution.

BipedalWalker For the BipedalWalker environment, we test agents on each of the individual challenges encoded in the
environment parameterization. Specifically, we evaluate agents in the following four environments:
• Stairs: The stair height parameters are set to [2,2] with the number of steps set to 5.
• PitGap: The pit gap parameter is set to [5,5].
• Stump: The stump parameter is set to [2,2].
• Roughness: The ground roughness parameter is set to 5.
Each of these environments is visualized in Figure 8 in the main paper. We also test agents on the simple
BipedalWalker-v3 environment and the more challenging BipedalWalkerHardcore-v3 environment. For
BipedalWalkerHardcore-v3, we note that none of our agents fully solve the environment, which is considered to
be a mean reward ge300 over 100 independent evaluations. To test whether it is possible with our base RL algorithm
and agent model, we trained an identical PPO agent directly on the environment for 1B steps. The reward achieved was
239—indistinguishable from that achieved by ACCEL, which additionally robustifies the agent against a much wider range
of environments, including the individual challenges described above.

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design
Table 6. Test performance on a variety of challenging evaluation environments. Each entry corresponds to the mean and standard error of
10 independent runs, where each run is evaluated for 100 trials on each environment. † indicates the generator creates each level with
obstacle parameters uniformly sampled between the corresponding minimum value of the “Easy Init” range and max value defined in
Table 9. ‡ indicates the generator instead uniformly samples obstacle parameters within the “Easy Init” ranges. Bold indicates being
within one standard error of the best mean. All methods are evaluated at 30k updates.
Environment

PAIRED

Minimax

ALP-GMM

DR†

PLR†

ACCEL†

ACCEL‡

Basic
Hardcore
Stairs
PitGap
Stump
Roughness

206.5 ± 30.3
−47.2 ± 10.6
−27.4 ± 12.1
−68.2 ± 9.7
−76.0 ± 10.3
−5.1 ± 25.9

154.3 ± 59.2
−44.3 ± 1.6
−2.6 ± 2.6
−79.3 ± 0.5
−65.0 ± 18.4
−1.2 ± 7.7

301.5 ± 11.6
29.7 ± 9.9
22.1 ± 6.3
98.8 ± 24.9
−22.4 ± 17.2
44.7 ± 11.6

261.9 ± 19.3
23.8 ± 8.3
23.3 ± 4.4
11.0 ± 7.6
−5.4 ± 5.5
52.3 ± 9.0

304.1 ± 1.8
82.6 ± 8.5
48.0 ± 4.3
46.2 ± 11.3
7.5 ± 6.4
126.7 ± 7.3

316.9 ± 2.1
163.3 ± 30.9
59.4 ± 10.5
49.6 ± 12.6
44.6 ± 49.8
211.7 ± 21.5

318.1 ± 1.0
236.0 ± 8.9
91.7 ± 8.9
133.3 ± 39.1
188.8 ± 10.9
248.9 ± 12.3

Mean

−2.9 ± 14.5

−6.3 ± 24.6

79.1 ± 17.5

61.1 ± 12.6

102.5 ± 13.0

140.9 ± 23.0

202.8 ± 13.6

Solved Rate

Reward

300

Basic

300

Hardcore

Stairs

300

PitGap

300

300

Stump

300

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

PAIRED

0

0

Minimax

ALP-GMM

DR

0

PLR

Roughness

0

ACCEL

Figure 25. Test results. Agents are evaluated for 100 episodes on a series of individual challenges, plots show mean and standard error
for each environment, across ten runs.

POET Generated Levels We also evaluated our agents on the six extremely challenging environments highlighted in the
original POET paper. These represent some of the most difficult environment parameterizations produced by POET. Since
each run of POET has a population of 20 agents, it is not clear if a single agent from any of their runs can solve more than
one of these challenges. In addition, POET only solves a single fixed seed of these environments. Instead, we report the
mean performance over 100 samples for each given parameterization, for all 10 runs of ACCEL. We report the mean and
max performance across all training seeds and trials for each environment parameterization in Table 7.
Table 7. Test performance on extremely challenging levels produced by POET. For each level, we run 100 trials with different random
seeds. Mean shows the mean performance across all 10 ACCEL runs and trials. Max shows the best performance out of all runs and trials
for each environment.
1a
1b
2a
2b
3a
3b
Mean
Max

0.01
0.03

0.01
0.05

0.00
0.00

0.03
0.08

0.01
0.03

0.12
0.31

B.5. Testing the Limits of Current Approaches
In Section 4, we showed the zero-shot performance for ACCEL and baseline methods on a 51 × 51 procedurally-generated
maze. ACCEL, where ACCEL saw over 50% mean success rate across training runs. We further test ACCEL, using both an
empty generator and the typical DR generator, as well as DR and PLR, on an even larger 101x101 maze, shown in Figure 26.
Such a large partially-observable maze would be challenging even for humans. On this larger maze, the performance of all
methods is significantly weaker, with DR and PLR achieving a mean success rate of 4%. However, ACCEL still outperforms
all baselines, achieving 8% and 7% mean success rates when using the empty and DR generators respectively.

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

Figure 26. PerfectMazesXL. A 101x101 procedurally-generated MiniGrid environment. The agents have to transfer zero-shot from
training in a 15x15 grid. This environment is challenging even for humans, since the agent only has a partially observable view, it
requires memorizing the current location at all times to ensure exploring all corners of the grid.

B.6. Additional Experiments
In this section we present a series of additional experiments to better understand the performance of ACCEL.
Ablation Studies To investigate the importance of various design choices for ACCEL, we consider a series of ablations:
• ACCEL The full ACCEL method using a DR generator.
• Learned Editor Same as the first condition, but the editor uses RL to optimize an editing policy that seeks to maximize
the positive value loss of the resulting levels.
• No Editor This is an ablation on the core editing mechanism, where replace the editing step in the first condition with
simply sampling an equivalent number of additional levels from the DR generator.
Each condition is an ablation of the full ACCEL method using a DR generator, sampling levels from the DR distribution at
the start of 10% of new episode rollouts. We train each ablation for 10k PPO updates and evaluate each on the zero-shot
maze environments. The results in Table 8 show that using a learned editor that seeks to maximize the PVL of the resulting
levels degrades zero-shot performance. Note however that each of these ablations, making use of editing, still outperform
the next best baseline, PLR, which sees a mean solved rate of 0.69 over all zero-shot environments. Finally, the No Editor
ablation performs worse than PLR, showing that ACCEL’s strong performance derives from level editing.
Diversity of the Level Buffer we compare a buffer of size 4k with no DR sampling against our method with a buffer size of
10k and 10% sampling. The plots show the proportion of the top 200 levels produced by just ten initial generator levels,
with a significant increase for the smaller buffer. We also compare the performance of the two agents on test levels with ten
tiles, showing clear outperformance for the lower concentration agent. It is likely that hyperparameters alone will not be
sufficient if we want to scale ACCEL to more open-ended domains, which we leave to future work.

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design
Table 8. Zero-shot transfer to human-designed environments. Each entry is the mean and standard error of five independent runs, where
each run is evaluated for 100 trials on each environment. All methods use a DR generator that places between 0 and 60 blocks.
Test Environment

ACCEL

Learned Editor

No Editor

16Rooms
16Rooms2
SimpleCrossing
FourRooms
SmallCorridor
LargeCorridor
Labyrinth
Labyrinth2
Maze
Maze2
Maze3

1.0 ± 0.0
0.51 ± 0.28
0.8 ± 0.05
0.85 ± 0.05
0.72 ± 0.1
0.91 ± 0.05
0.98 ± 0.02
0.97 ± 0.03
0.78 ± 0.21
0.5 ± 0.24
0.79 ± 0.14

0.9 ± 0.07
0.41 ± 0.19
0.9 ± 0.1
0.88 ± 0.04
0.6 ± 0.17
0.56 ± 0.18
0.99 ± 0.01
0.7 ± 0.15
0.57 ± 0.18
0.65 ± 0.15
0.95 ± 0.05

0.84 ± 0.06
0.68 ± 0.18
0.75 ± 0.05
0.88 ± 0.05
0.7 ± 0.18
0.63 ± 0.18
0.67 ± 0.19
0.48 ± 0.2
0.15 ± 0.08
0.23 ± 0.15
0.56 ± 0.17

Mean

0.79 ± 0.04

0.74 ± 0.04

0.58 ± 0.05

0.7

0.0

Concentration

Small Large

0.5

0.0

Return

Small Large

Figure 27. Replay buffer diversity vs. return in the lava environment. On the left we show the concentration of the replay buffer,
measured as the percentage of the top-100 high-regret levels that can be produced by just ten parents. On the right we compare the
average return on ten-tile test environments. Here, small corresponds to a buffer of size 4k, with no generator, while large indicates a
buffer of size 10k, using a generator 10% of the time.

C. Implementation Details
In this section we detail the training procedure for all our experiments. All training runs used a single V100 GPU and Intel
Xeon E5-2698 v4 CPUs. Our ACCEL implementation directly builds on top of the Robust PLR codebase, available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/dcd. For PAIRED and Minimax in the maze environment, we report
the results from Jiang et al. (2021a).
C.1. Environment Details
Learning with Lava The MiniHack environment is an open-source Gym environment (Brockman et al., 2016), which wraps
the game of NetHack via the NetHack Learning Environment (Küttler et al., 2020). MiniHack allows users (or agents) the
ability to fully specify environments leveraging the full NetHack runtime. For our experiments we use a simple 7 × 7 grid
and allow the agent to place lava tiles in any location. The DR agent samples the number of blocks in [0, 20]. The reward is
sparse, with the agent receiving +1 reward for reaching the goal and a per timestep penalty of −0.01.
Partially-Observable Navigation Each maze consists of a 15 × 15 grid, where each tile can contain a block, the goal, the
agent, or navigable space. The agent receives a reward of 1 − T /Tmax upon reaching the goal, where T is the episode length
and Tmax is the maximum episode length (set to 250 at training). The agent receives a reward of 0 if it fails to reach the goal.
BipedalWalker We use a modified version of the BipedalWalkerHardcore environment from OpenAI Gym. The
agent receives a 24-dimensional proprioceptive state corresponding to inputs from its lidar sensors, angles, and contacts. The
agent does not have access to its positional coordinates. The action space is four continuous values that control the torques
of its four motors. The environment design space is shown in Table 9, where we show the value of the initial environment
parameterization for ACCEL, the edit size, and the maximum values. In this environment, the UED parameters correspond
to the ranges of level properties, uniformly sampled to define each level. Thus, combined with a random seed, the UED

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

parameters determine a specific level. Parameters for DR levels are sampled between zero and the maximum value. For
PLR, we combine the environment parameterization with the specific seed of the sampled level, ensuring deterministic
generation of the replayed level. ACCEL makes each edit by randomly sampling one of the eight environment parameters
and adding or subtracting the corresponding edit size listed in Table 9 from the parameter value.
Table 9. Environment design space for the BipedalWalker environment. The UED parameters correspond to the min and max values for
each level property. When a specific level is created, each property (i.e. obstacle size) is sampled from the corresponding range.

Easy Init
Edit Size
Max Value

Stump Height

Stair Height

Stair Steps

Roughness

Pit Gap

[0,0.4]
0.2
[5,5]

[0,0.4]
0.2
[5,5]

1
1
9

Unif(0, 0.6)
Unif(0, 0.6)
10

[0,0.8]
0.4
[10,10]

Table 10. Total number of environment steps for a given number of student PPO updates.

Environment

PPO Updates

PLR

ACCEL

MiniGrid
BipedalWalker

20k
30k

327M
1.96B

369M
2.07B

C.2. Environment Design Procedure
Generating new levels For a fair comparison to the PAIRED level generation procedure, DR is implemented by sampling a
uniformly random teacher policy to output actions that set the environment parameters, thereby designing each level. Under
PAIRED, this policy is no longer uniformly random, but rather optimized to maximize the estimated regret (e.g. PVL)
incurred by the student agent on the resulting levels. The environment design procedure for the lava and maze domains is as
follows: For each timestep the teacher receives an observation consisting of a map of the entire level and takes chooses a tile
in the grid. For the first N steps, where N is teacher’s budget of blocks (or lava tiles) the teacher always places a block
(or lava tile). In the last two time steps, the teacher chooses a location for the goal and agent. This procedure reflects the
approach taken in several recent works (Dennis et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021b;a; Khalifa et al., 2020). For BipedalWalker,
the teacher generates each level by choosing a random value between the minimum value of the “Easy Init” range in Table 9
and the maximum value for each environment parameter. A random integer is then generated to seed the procedural content
generation algorithm, which takes the sampled parameters to produce the level.
Editing levels In lava levels, edits only add or remove obstacle tiles (i.e. lava or block tiles), while in MiniGrid mazes, edits
can also alter the goal location. If an edit places a lava or block tile in the current goal or agent position, then the new tile
replaces the goal or agent, which is randomly relocated after applying all remaining edits.
C.3. Hyperparameters
The majority of our hyperparameters are inherited from previous works such as (Dennis et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021b;a),
with a few small changes. For the lava grid in MiniHack we use the agent model from the NetHack paper (Küttler et al.,
2020), using the glyphs and blstats as observations. The agent has both a global and a locally cropped view (produced
using the coordinates in the blstats).
For MiniHack we conduct a grid search across the level replay buffer size {4000, 10000} for both PLR and ACCEL, and
for ACCEL we sweep across the edit method in {random, positive value loss}, where the latter option equates to a learned
editor trained with RL to maximize the positive value loss. For MiniGrid we use the replay buffer size from Jiang et al.
(2021a) and only conduct the ACCEL grid search over the edit objective, again sweeping across {random, positive value
loss} and replay rate from {0.8, 0.9}. For MiniGrid, we follow the protocol from Jiang et al. (2021a) and select the best
hyperparameters using the validation levels {16Rooms, Labyrinth, Maze}. The final hyperparameters chosen are shown in
Table 11.
For BipedalWalker we used the continuous control policy from the open source implementation of PPO from Kostrikov
(2018), as well as many of the hyperparameters used in the recommended settings for MuJoCo. This involves a simple

Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design

feedforward neural network with two hidden layers of size 64 and tanh activations. We tuned the hyperparameters for our base
agent using domain randomization, and conducted a sweep over the learning rate {3e-4, 3e-5}, PPO epochs {5, 20}, entropy
coefficient {0, 1e-3} and number of minibatches {4, 32}, using the validation performance on BipedalWalkerHardcore. We
then used these base agent configurations for all UED algorithms. For PLR we further conducted a sweep over the buffer
size {1000, 5000}, replay rate {0, 9, 0.5} and staleness coefficient {0.3, 0.5, 0.7}, using the same settings found for both
PLR and ACCEL. Finally, for ACCEL we swept over number of edits in {1, 2, 3, 4}.
Table 11. Hyperparameters used for training each method in each environment.
Parameter

MiniHack (Lava)

MiniGrid

BipedalWalker

0.995
0.95
256
5
1
0.2
32
1e-4
1e-5
0.5
yes
no
0.5
0.0
0.0

0.995
0.95
256
5
1
0.2
32
1e-4
1e-5
0.5
yes
no
0.5
0.0
0.0

0.99
0.9
2000
5
32
0.2
16
3e-4
1e-5
0.5
no
yes
0.5
1e-3
0.0

ACCEL
Edit rate, q
Replay rate, p
Buffer size, K
Scoring function
Edit method
Number of edits
Prioritization
Temperature, β
Staleness coefficient, ρ

1.0
0.9
10000
positive value loss
positive value loss
5
rank
0.3
0.3

1.0
0.8
4000
positive value loss
random
5
rank
0.3
0.3

1.0
0.9
1000
positive value loss
random
3
rank
0.1
0.5

PLR
Scoring function
Replay rate, p
Buffer size, K

positive value loss
0.5
10000

positive value loss
0.5
4000

positive value loss
0.5
1000

PPO
γ
λGAE
PPO rollout length
PPO epochs
PPO minibatches per epoch
PPO clip range
PPO number of workers
Adam learning rate
Adam ϵ
PPO max gradient norm
PPO value clipping
return normalization
value loss coefficient
student entropy coefficient
generator entropy coefficient

